Title: ShakespearesWords.com
Version: First Folio
Source: https://www.shakespeareswords.com/Public/Play.aspx?WorkId=30
======================================================================

Enter yong Bertram Count of Rossillion, his Mother,
and Helena, Lord Lafew, all in blacke.
Mother
IN deliuering my sonne from me, I burie a second
husband.
Ros.
And I in going Madam, weep ore my fathers
death anew; but I must attend his maiesties command,
to whom I am now in Ward, euermore in subiection.
Laf.
You shall find of the King a husband Madame,
you sir a father. He that so generally is at all times good,
must of necessitie hold his vertue to you, whose worthinesse
would stirre it vp where it wanted rather then lack it
where there is such abundance.
Mo.
What hope is there of his Maiesties
amendment?
Laf.
He hath abandon'd his Phisitions Madam, vnder
whose practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and
finds no other aduantage in the processe, but onely the
loosing of hope by time.
Mo.
This yong Gentlewoman had a father, O
that had, how sad a passage tis, whose skill was
almost as great as his honestie , had it stretch'd so far,
would haue made nature immortall, and death should
haue play for lacke of worke. Would for the Kings sake hee
were liuing, I thinke it would be the death of the Kings
disease.
Laf.
How call'd you the man you speake of Madam?
Mo.
He was famous sir in his profession, and it
was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon
Laf.
He was excellent indeed Madam, the King very
latelie spoke of him admiringly, and mourningly: hee
was skilfull enough to haue liu'd stil, if knowledge could
be set vp against mortallitie.
Ros.
What is it (my good Lord) the King languishes
of?
Laf.
A Fistula my Lord.
Ros
I heard not of it before.
Laf.
I would it were not notorious. Was this Gentlewoman
the Daughter of Gerard de Narbon
Mo.
His sole childe my Lord, and bequeathed to my
ouer looking . I haue those hopes of her good, that her
education promises her dispositions shee inherits, which
makes faire gifts fairer: for where an vncleane mind
carries vertuous qualities, there commendations go with
pitty, they are vertues and traitors too: in her they are the
better for their simplenesse; she deriues her honestie, and
atcheeues her goodnesse.
Lafew.
Your commendations Madam get from her teares.
Mo.
'Tis the best brine a Maiden can season her
praise in. The remembrance of her father neuer
approches her heart, but the tirrany of her sorrowes
takes all liuelihood from her cheeke. No more of this
Helena go too, no more least it be rather thought you
affect a sorrow, then to haue------
Hell.
I doe affect a sorrow indeed, but I haue it too.
Laf.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessiue greefe the enemie to the liuing.
Mo.
If the liuing be enemie to the greefe, the excesse
makes it soone mortall.
Ros.
Maddam I desire your holie wishes.
Laf.
How vnderstand we that?
Mo.
Be thou blest Bertrame and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape: thy blood and vertue
Contend for Empire in thee, and thy goodnesse
Share with thy birth-right . Loue all, trust a few,
Doe wrong to none: be able for thine enemie
Rather in power then vse: and keepe thy friend
Vnder thy owne lifes key. Be checkt for silence,
But neuer tax'd for speech. What heauen more wil,
That thee may furnish, and my prayers plucke downe,
Fall on thy head. Farwell my Lord,
'Tis an vnseason'd Courtier, good my Lord
Aduise him.
Laf.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his loue.
Mo.
Heauen blesse him: Farwell Bertram.
Ro.
The best wishes that can be forg'd in your
thoghts be seruants to you: be comfortable
to my mother, your Mistris, and make much of her.
Laf.
Farewell prettie Lady, you must hold the credit of
your father.
Hell.
O were that all, I thinke not on my father,
And these great teares grace his remembrance more
Then those I shed for him. What was he like?
I haue forgott him. My imagination
Carries no fauour in't but Bertrams
I am vndone , there is no liuing, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one,
That I should loue a bright particuler starre,
And think to wed it, he is so aboue me
In his bright radience and colaterall light,
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere;
Th' ambition in my loue thus plagues it selfe:
The hind that would be mated by the Lion
Must die for loue. 'Twas prettie, though a plague
To see him euerie houre to sit and draw
His arched browes , his hawking eie, his curles
In our hearts table: heart too capeable
Of euerie line and tricke of his sweet fauour .
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancie
Must sanctifie his Reliques. Who comes heere?
Enter Parrolles.
One that goes with him: I loue him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious Liar,
Thinke him a great way foole, solie a coward,
Yet these fixt euils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when Vertues steely bones
Lookes bleake i'th cold wind: withall, full ofte we see
Cold wisedome waighting on superfluous follie.
Par.
Saue you faire Queene.
Hel.
And you Monarch.
Par.
No.
Hel
And no.
Par.
Are you meditating on virginitie?
Hel.
I: you haue some staine of souldier in you: Let mee
aske you a question. Man is enemie to virginitie, how may
we barracado it against him?
Par.
Keepe him out.
Hel.
But he assailes, and our virginitie though valiant,
in the defence yet is weak: vnfold to vs some war-like
resistance.
Par.
There is none: Man setting downe before you,
will vndermine you, and blow you vp.
Hel.
Blesse our poore Virginity from vnderminers and
blowers vp. Is there no Military policy how Virgins
might blow vp men?
Par.
Virginity beeing blowne downe, Man will quicklier
be blowne vp: marry in blowing him downe againe,
with the breach your selues made, you lose your Citty. It
is not politicke, in the Common-wealth of Nature, to preserue
virginity. Losse of Virginitie, is rationall encrease, and
there was neuer Virgin goe, till virginitie was first lost.
That you were made of, is mettall to make Virgins.
Virginitie, by beeing once lost, may be ten times found: by
being euer kept, it is euer lost: 'tis too cold a
companion: Away with't.
Hel.
I will stand for't a little, though therefore I die
a Virgin.
Par.
There's little can bee saide in't, 'tis against the
rule of Nature. To speake on the part of virginitie, is to
accuse your Mothers; which is most infallible
disobedience. He that hangs himselfe is a Virgin: Virginitie
murthers it selfe, and should be buried in highwayes out of
all sanctified limit, as a desperate Offendresse against
Nature. Virginitie breedes mites, much like a Cheese, consumes
it selfe to the very payring, and so dies with feeding
his owne stomacke. Besides, Virginitie is peeuish , proud,
ydle, made of selfe-loue, which is the most inhibited sinne in
the Cannon . Keepe it not, you cannot choose but loose by't.
Out with't: within ten yeare it will make it selfe two, which
is a goodly increase, and the principall it selfe not much
the worse. Away with't.
Hel.
How might one do sir, to loose it to her owne
liking?
Par.
Let mee see. Marry ill, to like him that ne're it
likes. 'Tis a commodity wil lose the glosse with lying:
The longer kept, the lesse worth: Off with't while 'tis
vendible. Answer the time of request, Virginitie like an
olde Courtier, weares her cap out of fashion, richly suted,
but vnsuteable , iust like the brooch & the tooth-pick,
which were not now: your Date is better in your Pye and
your Porredge, then in your cheeke: and your virginity,
your old virginity, is like one of our French wither'd
peares, it lookes ill, it eates drily, marry 'tis a wither'd
peare: it was formerly better, marry yet 'tis a wither'd
peare: Will you any thing with it?
Hel.
Not my virginity yet:
There shall your Master haue a thousand loues,
A Mother, and a Mistresse, and a friend,
A Phenix , Captaine, and an enemy,
A guide, a Goddesse, and a Soueraigne,
A Counsellor, a Traitoresse, and a Deare:
His humble ambition, proud humility:
His iarring, concord: and his discord, dulcet:
His faith, his sweet disaster: with a world
Of pretty fond adoptious christendomes
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he:
I know not what he shall, God send him well,
The Courts a learning place, and he is one.
Par.
What one ifaith?
Hel.
That I wish well, 'tis pitty.
Par.
What's pitty?
Hel.
That wishing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt, that we the poorer borne,
Whose baser starres do shut vs vp in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And shew what we alone must thinke, which neuer
Returnes vs thankes.
Enter Page.
Pag .
Monsieur Parrolles / My Lord cals for you.
Par.
Little Hellen farewell, if I can remember thee,
I will thinke of thee at Court.
Hel.
Monsieur Parolles you were borne vnder a
charitable starre.
Par.
Vnder Mars I.
Hel.
I especially thinke, vnder Mars.
Par
Why vnder Mars?
Hel.
The warres hath so kept you vnder , that you must
needes be borne vnder Mars.
Par.
When he was predominant.
Hel.
When he was retrograde I thinke rather.
Par.
Why thinke you so?
Hel.
You go so much backward when you fight.
Par.
That's for aduantage.
Hel.
So is running away, / When feare proposes the
safetie: / But the composition that your valour and feare
makes in you, is a vertue of a good wing, and I like the
weare well.
Paroll.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answere thee
acutely: I will returne perfect Courtier, in the which my
instruction shall serue to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be
capeable of a Courtiers councell, and vnderstand what
aduice shall thrust vppon thee, else thou diest in thine
vnthankfulnes, and thine ignorance makes thee away,
farewell: When thou hast leysure , say thy praiers: when
thou hast none, remember thy Friends: Get thee a good
husband, and vse him as he vses thee: So farewell.
Hel.
Our remedies oft in our selues do lye,
Which we ascribe to heauen: the fated skye
Giues vs free scope, onely doth backward pull
Our slow designes, when we our selues are dull.
What power is it, which mounts my loue so hye,
That makes me see, and cannot feede mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune, Nature brings
To ioyne like, likes; and kisse like natiue things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their paines in sence , and do suppose
What hath beene, cannot be. Who euer stroue
To shew her merit, that did misse her loue?
(The Kings disease) my proiect may deceiue me,
But my intents are fixt, and will not leaue me.
Exit