Title: ShakespearesWords.com
Version: First Folio
Source: https://www.shakespeareswords.com/Public/Play.aspx?WorkId=26
======================================================================

Enter Orlando and Adam .
Orlando.
As I remember Adam , it was vpon this fashion
bequeathed me by will, but poore a thousand Crownes, and
as thou saist, charged my brother on his blessing to
breed mee well: and there begins my sadnesse: My
brother Iaques he keepes at schoole , and report speakes
goldenly of his profit: for my part, he keepes me rustically
at home, or (to speak more properly) staies me heere at
home vnkept: for call you that keeping for a gentleman
of my birth, that differs not from the stalling of an
Oxe? his horses are bred better, for besides that they
are faire with their feeding, they are taught their mannage ,
and to that end Riders deerely hir'd: but I (his brother)
gaine nothing vnder him but growth, for the which his
Animals on his dunghils are as much bound to him as I:
besides this nothing that he so plentifully giues me, the
something that nature gaue mee, his countenance seemes
to take from me: hee lets mee feede with his Hindes , barres mee
the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines
my gentility with my education. This is it Adam that
grieues me, and the spirit of my Father, which I thinke is
within mee, begins to mutinie against this seruitude. I will
no longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy
how to auoid it.
Enter Oliuer .
Adam.
Yonder comes my Master, your brother.
Orlan.
Goe a-part Adam , and thou shalt heare how he
will shake me vp .
Oli.
Now Sir, what make you heere?
Orl.
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
Oli.
What mar you then sir?
Orl.
Marry sir, I am helping you to mar that which
God made, a poore vnworthy brother of yours with
idlenesse.
Oliuer.
Marry sir be better employed, and be naught a
while.
Orlan.
Shall I keepe your hogs, and eat huskes with them?
what prodigall portion haue I spent, that I should come
to such penury?
Oli.
Know you where you are sir?
Orl.
O sir, very well: heere in your Orchard.
Oli.
Know you before whom sir?
Orl.
I, better then him I am before knowes mee: I
know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle
condition of bloud you should so know me: the courtesie
of nations allowes you my better, in that you are the first
borne, but the same tradition takes not away my bloud ,
were there twenty brothers betwixt vs: I haue as much
of my father in mee, as you, albeit I confesse your comming
before me is neerer to his reuerence .
Oli.
What Boy.
Orl.
Come, come elder
brother, you are too yong in this.
Oli.
Wilt thou lay hands on me villaine?
Orl.
I am no villaine : I am the yongest sonne of Sir
Rowland de Boys , he was my father, and he is thrice a
villaine that saies such a father begot villaines: wert thou
not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy
throat, till this other had puld out thy tongue for saying
so, thou hast raild on thy selfe.
Adam.
Sweet Masters bee patient, for
your Fathers remembrance, be at accord.
Oli.
Let me goe I say.
Orl.
I will not till I please: you shall heare mee: my
father charg'd you in his will to giue me good education:
you haue train'd me like a pezant, obscuring and hiding
from me all gentleman-like qualities: the spirit of my
father growes strong in mee, and I will no longer endure it:
therefore allow me such exercises as may become a
gentleman, or giue mee the poore allottery my father left
me by testament, with that I will goe buy my fortunes.
Oli.
And what wilt thou do? beg when that is spent?
Well sir, get you in. I will not long be troubled with
you: you shall haue some part of your will, I pray you
leaue me.
Orl.
I will no further offend you, then becomes mee
for my good.
Oli.
Get you with him, you olde dogge.
Adam.
Is old dogge my reward: most true, I haue lost my
teeth in your seruice: God be with my olde master, he
would not haue spoke such a word.
Ex . Orl . Ad .
Oli.
Is it euen so, begin you to grow vpon me? I will
physicke your ranckenesse , and yet giue no thousand crownes
neyther: holla Dennis .
Enter Dennis .
Den.
Calls your worship ?
Oli.
Was not Charles the Dukes Wrastler heere to
speake with me?
Den.
So please you, he is heere at the doore, and
importunes accesse to you.
Oli.
Call him in:
'twill be a good way: and to morrow the wrastling is.
Enter Charles .
Cha.
Good morrow to your worship.
Oli.
Good Mounsier Charles : what's the new newes at
the new Court?
Charles.
There's no newes at the Court Sir, but the olde
newes: that is, the old Duke is banished by his yonger
brother the new Duke, and three or foure louing Lords
haue put themselues into voluntary exile with him,
whose lands and reuenues enrich the new Duke, therefore
he giues them good leaue to wander.
Oli.
Can you tell if Rosalind the Dukes daughter bee
banished with her Father?
Cha.
O no; for the Dukes daughter her Cosen so
loues her, being euer from their Cradles bred together,
that hee would haue followed her exile, or haue died to
stay behind her; she is at the Court, and no lesse beloued
of her Vncle, then his owne daughter, and neuer two Ladies
loued as they doe.
Oli.
Where will the old Duke liue?
Cha.
They say hee is already in the Forrest of Arden ,
and a many merry men with him; and there they liue
like the old Robin Hood of England : they say many
yong Gentlemen flocke to him euery day, and fleet the
time carelesly as they did in the golden world.
Oli.
What, you wrastle to morrow before the new
Duke.
Cha.
Marry doe I sir: and I came to acquaint you
with a matter: I am giuen sir secretly to vnderstand,
that your yonger brother Orlando hath a disposition
to come in disguis'd against mee to try a fall: to morrow
sir I wrastle for my credit, and hee that escapes me
without some broken limbe, shall acquit him well: your
brother is but young and tender, and for your loue I
would bee loth to foyle him, as I must for my owne honour
if hee come in: therefore out of my loue to you, I came
hither to acquaint you withall, that either you might
stay him from his intendment, or brooke such disgrace
well as he shall runne into, in that it is a thing of his owne
search, and altogether against my will.
Oli.
Charles , I thanke thee for thy loue to me, which
thou shalt finde I will most kindly requite: I had my selfe
notice of my Brothers purpose heerein, and haue by
vnder-hand meanes laboured to disswade him from it;
but he is resolute. Ile tell thee Charles , it is the stubbornest
yong fellow of France, full of ambition, an
enuious emulator of euery mans good parts, a secret &
villanous contriuer against mee his naturall brother:
therefore vse thy discretion, I had as  liefe thou didst
breake his necke as his finger. And thou wert best looke
to't; for if thou dost him any slight disgrace, or if hee
doe not mightilie grace himselfe on thee, hee will practise
against thee by poyson, entrap thee by some treacherous
deuise , and neuer leaue thee till he hath tane thy life
by some indirect meanes or other: for I assure thee,
(and almost with teares I speake it) there is not one so
young, and so villanous this day liuing. I speake but
brotherly of him, but should I anathomize him to thee,
as hee is, I must blush, and weepe, and thou must looke
pale and wonder.
Cha.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you: if hee
come to morrow, Ile giue him his payment: if euer hee goe
alone againe, Ile neuer wrastle for prize more: and so
God keepe your worship.
Exit .
Farewell good Charles . Now will I stirre this
Gamester: I hope I shall see an end of him; for my soule
(yet I know not why) hates nothing more then he: yet
hee's gentle, neuer school'd, and yet learned, full of
noble deuise , of all sorts enchantingly beloued, and
indeed so much in the heart of the world, and especially
of my owne people, who best know him, that I am
altogether misprised : but it shall not be so long, this
wrastler shall cleare all: nothing remaines, but that I
kindle the boy thither, which now Ile goe about.
Exit .